I actually studied the politics of Islam
of the Muslim world at the University of
Toronto before September 11th 2001 and
at that time I had a very memorable
University professor dr. ramin Jahan
Begley and he's actually now a little
bit famous I guess he was a little bit
famous back then too um he's one of
these guys who tries to kind of reinvent
Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence to
have a salient message for the Muslim
world in our times his hearts in the
right place that Professor John beg Lew
I got to see how his whole life changed
after September 11th 2001 because at
that time the University of Toronto had
a completely dismissive and contemptuous
attitude towards politics in the Muslim
world they didn't really have any
interest in politics anywhere outside of
the United States and Canada and then
suddenly after September 11th 2001 they
wanted to make it into a big deal to
have some kind of expanding Department
or some kind of research interest in
that area so I got to see those
struggles I got to see as that professor
struggled to get even half 1/2 credit
course taught on the politics in the
Muslim world and the department the
other professors had this sneering
attitude towards it like this was the
most marginal and trivial thing
imaginable to have a course discussing
the politics of places like Egypt and
Libya and Syria and Iraq and Iran to
have just one course one half credit
course on University calendar that
seemed to be too much to ask in the year
2000 and then you're by the end of the
year 2001 2002 suddenly all their
attitudes have changed one of the guys
who has come up and become a major or
public intellectual on the wings of the
world's concern over Islam is this guy
Sam Harris I've heard him complained
that really he wants to be a public
intellectual engaged
variety of ethical issues and questions
and that he resents the fact that he's
been painted into a corner in dealing so
heavily with his LOM and I've heard him
complained that he finds his own voice
rather boring on the subject of his LOM
that he's tired of talking about it and
so on I disagree I think that that is
his area of greatest strength and yes he
has the most practice in talking about
it over the last 15 years shall we say
he has obviously refined his ability to
engage with those issues and to discuss
them both with hostile audiences and
with people who are more sympathetic and
willing to engage in debate and
discussion with him simply put you know
Sam Harris is sincere but he's not too
bright those of us who are vegan and who
are familiar with his excuses for not
being vegan in the recent past were not
too impressed when he finally grudgingly
decided to try to become vegan again
quite recently
so this exposed us to a side of Sam
Harris's act and Sam Harris's intellect
that is just not too impressive if you
search within my own channel you'll see
I did make one earlier video
poking some fun at Sam Harris for his
intellectually unimpressive excuses for
why he continued to eat meat even when
he himself said he believed it was
morally wrong I wrote a letter to Sam
Harris today and I'm gonna read out a
little piece of it in just a minute here
um the real test of someone's
intelligence I think is their
adaptability to applying the skills they
already have outside of their own area
of greatest strength I think Sam Harris
is very familiar with the critique of
Islam
he's obviously familiar to a great
extent also with the critique of
Christianity and yet when he turns his
attention to Buddhism he is a complete
[ __ ] he seems to have no
critical faculties whatsoever now for
those of you don't know Sam Harris is a
vocal atheist and he's also a very harsh
critic of just New Age philosophy cult
groups but not just cult groups um
poorly supported mystical beliefs in
general he's supposed to be a skeptic
the word skeptic has been so badly
degraded in its meaning and significance
in my lifetime boy but anyway he aspires
to skepticism and yet you find on the
subject of Buddhist meditation he is a
soft-hearted true believer who talks
about his 20-year friendship with a guy
who's associated with the bar Center and
other frankly disreputable white Western
meditation guru organizations that sell
a badly bastardized version of Buddhism
to affluent white Western folks now why
am i using words like white and Western
here why are they significant in talking
with Buddhism well whether you are Pro
Buddhist anti Buddhist agnostic or
neutral there are certain warning signs
when you're looking at a religious group
there are certain warnings that make you
evaluate the evidence in front of you in
a different way with a different set of
concerns in many ways the Catholic
religion we could say is a worrying
religion they have a history of
unbelievable violence persecution Wars
etc but if your own teenage son your own
teenage daughter told you that they were
going to join the mainstream Catholic
faith you would probably not be that
worried
despite that history in many ways
Catholicism although there are a lot of
things I dislike about Catholicism as a
religion in many ways it is shall we say
a destabilizing force in the world in
that it is very conservative and
slow-moving they very gradually shifted
from denying the existence of evolution
to accepting the existence of evolution
you might not have noticed that when the
Catholic Church instructed its priests
to no longer claim that evolution is
only a theory nothing much changed in
the world but you know very slowly they
admitted that you know the earth orbits
around the Sun and theory of evolution
is OK and not an offense to God and man
but these same characteristics make it
sort of non-threatening however if your
teenage son or daughter told you that
they were joining a splinter faction of
Catholicism a small separate group that
does not recognize the legitimacy of the
Pope and does not recognize Italy as the
center of Catholicism but has some
totally different set of doctrines then
you might be concerned not necessarily
because the group is a cult it would
simply be a warning it would simply be
something that raises concerns now even
within Islam likewise if you had a
friend let's say your brother your
sister decides to convert to Islam if
they're converting to one of the big
mainstream forms of Islam you probably
would not be that worried any of the big
major boring institutional slow moving
forms of Islam even though you may
personally disagree with Islam I myself
I don't like the contents of the Quran I
don't believe in the existence of this
God and so on but that is not to
worrying whereas if they told you they
were converting to a small splinter
group that doesn't recognize the
legitimacy of any of the conventional
authorities in Islam maybe even a group
that doesn't recognize the authority of
the Quran itself now you've got
questions now you've got concerns right
there were red flags here even if it
turns out this particular splinter group
is completely harmless
you've got to ask questions about its
legitimacy its assumptions its religious
practices that would not arise for
mainstream Catholicism mainstream Islam
now why is that for one thing it's
because the large mainstream groups also
have mainstream sources of scrutiny of
skepticism being applied to them as
terrible as the sexual abuses by the
Catholic Church have been to use a more
specific example the Catholic Church
within Ireland the Catholic Church
within Spain an amazing recent history
within my lifetime of sexual abuse still
that abuse was examined by the
mainstream newspapers by the police
ultimately it was a focus of
investigation etc and small splinter
groups whether they're cult groups or
new religions factions that have broken
off their secrecy and their lack of
accountability to a higher authority
their lack of accountability to the
newspapers is because nobody's
interested in them and their lack of
authority to the Pope and the you know
institutional structures the Pope has to
try to enforce orthodoxy all of those
things make a small splinter group more
worrying if your friend if your brother
if your sister converted now these
things do exist for Catholicism they do
exist for as long they do exist for
Buddhism these types of splinter groups
are lack of a better term the deny the
legitimacy of the mainstream religion a
a long time ago when I was a kid there
was a famous singer called Sinead
O'Connor I don't think many people
remember her today but she was a very
famous very successful singer recording
artist we now say um she was Irish and
she broke off from Catholicism to join a
small group that many people consider a
cult and famously she went on television
and she tore up the photograph of the
Pope and so on okay whirring one of my
university professors not the one I
mentioned earlier
actually one of my white Western
University professors converted to Islam
and he converted to a peculiar small
splinter group of Islam that only exists
in Indonesia was fitted indonesia so you
have questions now remember I looked
into it when I found out that guy
converted to this peculiar form Islam I
did some google searching and actually
it it seems really harmless it's not a
scary or militant group but still the
question has to be asked your concerns
have to be there friend of yours and so
on gets involved these things now Bao
means if if your friend converts the
mainstream Catholicism you should ask
questions also she asked what their
motives are should I you should take a
human interest in their well-being and
and how that religion may well change
their lives but if we're being fair and
equal here why do we not apply the same
standards of scrutiny in Buddhism even
if you are Pro Buddhists if you are
watching this video and you're a devout
believer in what you consider Orthodox
Buddhism you should want these same
standards to be applied or even higher
standards why is it paradoxically that
in Buddhism we seem to have a much lower
standard of scrutiny a lower standard of
skepticism we regarded as less
problematic if you're talking about a
small splinter group in California that
is run by white Western people that
doesn't recognize the legitimacy of the
equivalent of the Pope in their form of
the religion so you know we have
splinter groups here in the West within
Tibetan Buddhism that do not recognize
the Dalai Lama that have their own
separate claims to authority that should
be worrying for the same reasons I've
just explained and we have these
terrified of Buddhist groups that don't
recognize the authorities in Thailand
don't recognize the authorities in Sri
Lanka well why is that why are you a
small separate splinter group
when you look down the list of the
so-called meditation masters at the bar
Center which is the center that Sam
Harris endorses I think uncritically I
think stupidly I think shamefully given
the guy's whole stance on religion cults
etc the main thing you see is that the
claims to legitimacy by these would-be
religious leaders who are almost
entirely white and Western I think they
had one african-american woman but there
were no Asians there a list of pastors
this Buddhism is an Asian dominated
religion
I mean if so many suppose enlightened
masters teaching meditation none of them
are Chinese none of them are Sri Lankan
none of them are from India
you know raises questions again even
even with Islam if you had a Muslim
group that only exists in Indonesia -
well why is that
why doesn't exist in Saudi Arabia or
Palestine or all over the world there
must be some peculiar reason why this
group rejects the authority of other
mainstream aspects of the religion there
are questions to ask I think it
ultimately is just a kind of racism
whereby white Western people do not want
to question the authority and legitimacy
of other white Western people who become
leaders in Buddhism and they should they
should question it more if I were to
represent myself to you if I just said
you look I am a member of the sium
nakiya from Sri Lanka cm nakai in Sri
Lanka is one of the two mainstream the
equivalent of mainstream Catholicism in
Tara by the Buddhism it's a mainstream
slow moving slightly authoritarian
organization you know same way as in
Catholicism there's a hierarchy there
are people in charge there are always
questions about you know financial
corruption and this sort of thing just
like a thoughtless ism it's a big enough
religion that it has those features of a
hierarchical slow-moving movement and if
anyone wants to change something in that
version of the religion it's going to
take a very long time to get anywhere
for
and people do people do seek reform you
know they say uh these things were doing
at the funerals you know we should clean
up what's been going on with funeral
ceremonies or whatever the issue of the
day is including you know in Sri Lanka
they're open debates about things like
eating beef whether or not they should
try to ban the production of cow meat
and so on but anyway all those all those
debates are ongoing but it's within the
framework of old fashioned conventional
hierarchical religion if I present
myself to you as just a member of that
religion okay you've got the same
reasons to be skeptical of me as you
would be skeptical of a mainstream
Catholic but if you look down the list
of the the white faces who are
supposedly the gurus and meditation
masters at a place like the bar Center a
place that Sam Harris so uncritically
and stupidly respects and supports what
are their claims to legitimacy and what
are their reasons for rejecting the
central authorities that normally would
define legitimacy in Buddhism well the
number one pattern I see is simply so
and so it gives the person's name
so-and-so has been meditating since 1973
and has been teaching meditation since
1976 and opened his own Meditation
Center in 1986
of course the years are different for
each person and so these are not
credentials this should make you more
suspicious of the person not less I'll
tell you why if I work for someone else
as a cook if I work as a cook in the
kitchen in a real hierarchy let's say at
a hotel chain I'm a cook in the Hilton
Hotel then you know I have to be able to
cook good food by that hotel chain
standard I'm I'm not saying it's an
objectives it's a subjective standard
but it's a hierarchical slow-moving
standard the Hilton Hotel chain any big
hotel company it's a bit like the
Catholic Church there's a talk there in
relationship and I don't get to just
decide
what's gonna taste good what kind of
food I want to cocaine but if I inherit
money from my parents if I win the
lottery if I somehow get money and then
I open my own restaurant
I'm the boss I'm the one person in
charge then I can cook anything I want
and nobody can really tell me that my
food tastes like crap or I'm not a very
good cook and I can hire anyone I want
to be to cook with me there's actually
no accountability and no kind of
subjective standard applied to me much
less an objective standard the levels of
scrutiny and skepticism we apply to
Buddhism should at least be as high if
not higher than what we apply to
scholars of ancient Greek and I'll tell
you why scholars of ancient Greek will
very rarely make claims this philosophy
this psychological concept from the
ancient Greek text still gets effects
today I do once in a while but with
Buddhism so with ancient Greek sorry
I'll stick with aged Greek for a second
so with ancient Greek most of the claims
you're gonna get are to authenticity or
to the quality of interpretation or to
some sort of cultural and literary
significance of what your claims are if
you're the expert if you're the
interpreter of ancient Greek but yeah
once in a while there might be claims
meant for there might be claims made
about what this means today why this
matters today how this can help you live
a more meaningful life etc with Buddhism
you have it both ways people are making
claims about meditation down on the one
hand are supposed to be demonstrably
authentic authoritative etc and on the
other hand are supposed to have pseudo
medical benefits for you today they're
supposed to make you ten percent happier
they're supposed to make you more
focused more intelligent more productive
hope you earn more money help you get
over to your dough
force help you attract members of the
opposite sex help you lead a better sex
life or help you live in celibacy every
possible crackpot promise of the
pseudo-scientific scene has been hung on
to Buddhist meditation including by the
type of white Western people you see
teaching at the bar Center so we have
both of the problems of the note lining
here when we're looking at white Western
gurus self-appointed experts we have the
problem of the cook who owns the kitchen
we have the problem of who says you're
an expert you do you started meditating
in 73 you decided to start teaching
meditation in 76 didn't get a diploma
didn't pass a test didn't get a driver's
license didn't get any kind of licensing
or 800k you decided you were teacher and
a couple years later you got the money
somehow and you opened a center and you
know now you're an expert and nobody can
question you for one thing nobody will
really be motivated to question you
anyone who thinks you're a crackpot they
just walk out the door they don't show
up in the first place or they show up
they listen for five minutes and walk of
the door nobody gets rewarded for a
critical engagement with this kind of
self-appointed expert and the other hand
because you're the head of your own
little hierarchy you don't you don't
recognize any Popol it's right any
Popish or people we have both words
English language polish and people you
don't recognize any Pope ish authority
shall we say over you to scrutinize you
and so on well you're making up your own
nonsense and why not recognize those
authorities why is it that these
self-appointed white Western leaders of
contemporary Buddhism and meditation
starters why don't they deeply respect
the people who are the equivalent of the
Pope in their religion why aren't they
trying to become part of a formal
hierarchy such as the CM nakiya in sri
lanka or any of the mainstream
organizations in Thailand now I'll give
you a best-case scenario in a worst-case
scenario answer that question it's not
just hypothetical question real quick
best case scenario would be that these
white Western leaders are actually real
experts in those Asian versions of the
religion that they have spent years
becoming fluent in a language such as
Thai Sinhalese Cambodian that they're
fluent in one of the contemporary living
languages of tera vaada Buddhism and
that through their deep study their
profound socio-political understanding
of what's wrong with the religion they
have an analysis of the ways in which
that Southeast Asian religion is corrupt
and they tried to reform it from the
inside
but despairing after some period time
they decided to instead set up their own
Foundation and try to reform from the
outside that is the best case scenario
good luck finding one example of a
person who is in that position sadly
what you are much more likely to find is
that these people these white Western
gurus absolutely avoid any critique of
those Asian Buddhist authorities one of
the reasons for that being as soon as
they engage in the critique then there
are other people who can challenge them
so if I say conventional Asia and
authority on Buddhism is wrong about
something because I'm a poly scholar I
have read the original text I know what
it means now we've got a contestable
claim right that's like having a
specific rity cat the Catholic Chur say
look the Catholic Church teaches you
about the virgin birth but let's look at
what the Scriptures actually say
actually historically that one's very
easy to prove you can go into the
history of the text and pretty rapidly
show look the original text did not even
contain this legend it didn't contain a
myth that the mother of Jesus was a
virgin so this is a spurious and false
notion okay
yes theoretically in the best case
scenario it is possible that you would
have a white Western Buddhist movement
that has splintered off and formed its
own faction for these reasons tragically
this is almost never the case and among
the reasons for that is exactly the
level of legitimacy and simply hard work
that would be required for any group of
Westerners to engage in that right some
have tried and some have dropped out you
know this guy jack Kornfield he's now a
total snake oil salesman but in terms of
the history of his movement
he started by proclaiming some of these
things those guys were reacted to forms
of corruption that were endemic
especially in Tibetan Buddhism both
Asian Tibetan Buddhism Tibetans who had
come to America and white Western people
who had appropriated and reinvented
Tibet most they saw the corruption that
said okay let's have some kind of
critical tera vaada based response to
this the results are not good and look
jack Kornfield any of these guys jack
Kornfield has a PhD have you read his
thesis have you even looked at the
Wikipedia article on the university that
gave him that PhD would you call that a
real university would you trust a
medical doctor who had their diploma
from a university that doesn't really
exist and that at that time wasn't even
licensed to give up a cheese and so on
who do you think his supervisor was that
University what treated what tradition
is he represented what's his source of
authority as I say in a best-case
scenario yes your religious authority
could be based on brilliant original
research new translations new
examinations of ancient texts newer it's
possible but sadly in the 21st century
just ain't so instead in the same way
that we have to look skeptically at a
splinter group that has formed a
separate faction from Catholicism and
doesn't recognize the Pope and so on
even though there may be real causes
you know there's obviously corruption in
the Catholic Church there are obviously
problems in that religion there although
there may be causes we sympathize with
for why that splinter group arose we
have to be incredibly skeptical
incredibly rigorous and examining why
the group exists and what its aims
really are because nine times out of ten
at least nine times out of ten the
reality is that people broke off and
formed this separate faction simply for
the ego and authority of the people in
charge why are there so many tiny white
Western Buddhist groups and so few that
resemble the Catholic Church in any way
why are there so few that have a
hierarchy or just just simply have
respect for a leader based in Asia for a
conventional monastic system s-so
Buddhism is all about that's the core of
the religion if I were recording this
video six months ago I could have said
if you think sam harris is a genius just
look at his excuses for why he eats meat
for why he is not VIII okay today the
guy is vegan maybe a few months from now
he's going to give up being vegan and go
back to eat meat I don't know but what
I'm here to say to you today is if you
think sam harris is brilliant sadly just
take a look at what he has to say about
buddhism read a little bit of what I
wrote soon here I wrote him just an
email it is very sad for me to see your
uncritical reception of a complete
charlatan and the person of Joseph
Goldstein and that you are willing to
treat him as an objective and detached
authority on texts he has never studied
as primary sources
already we have such a profound problem
here if you want to record a podcast
you're a major public intellectual like
Sam Harris if you want to record a
podcast and tear about Buddhism why
would your expert be Joseph Goldstein
why Joseph Colson yes his resume his CV
listed on the the bar center VAR re is
the center that Sam Harris endorses if
if you can interview anyone in the world
I would understand why you would enter
interview someone with a PhD from
Cambridge University who represents the
hidebound British tradition of Buddhist
studies I can understand why you would
choose that interview there's a very
different tradition incidentally in
Germany it's not very robust right now
but the Germans who last 200 years they
had a very strong academic tradition of
the study of Buddhism you could get one
of those guys on the radio you could
invite one of those guys to do an
interview in a podcast I understand that
on the other hand I completely
understand and I myself was Patra I
completely understand why you would want
to interview a a village monk a monk
from a small town in Sri Lanka a monk
from a small town in northeastern
Thailand who really represents something
authentic about tera vaada Buddhism a
guy who actually gets his hands dirty
performing funeral rituals and going to
the charnel grounds and actually you
know ripping up rags and sewing the rags
together to make a Buddhist you know
gown a Buddhist robe we used the word
robe in English a Buddhist robe out of
old cloth I completely respect that
that's that's closer to anthropology of
course and then again if it's about
someone who's authoritative someone
who's an authority figure then you want
to instead of the village monk maybe a
monk who is up near the the top of the
hierarchy you could be interviewing
anyone but instead you're interviewing
Joseph Goldstein
and what credentials does he have he he
got interested in Buddhism back when he
was working in the Peace Corps
the United States Peace Corps in
Thailand didn't learn how to speak Thai
didn't learn how to read Pali he's at
decades and decades didn't learn any of
these languages to me that's a failure
all right if if you got really
passionate about Judaism and you never
learn Hebrew I you became a some kind of
Jewish rabbi a self-made rabbi who
doesn't recognize any of the established
churches he doesn't even recognize
Reform Judaism you became an independent
rabbi with your own little faction and
opened your own Meditation Center
because believe me Judaism has its own
form of meditation
it's nothing unique to Buddhism about
the concept of meditation Norman Asus's
amore o OG and where did you learn
Hebrew what if you don't know Hebrew you
don't know Greek you don't know Yiddish
what what kind of a rabbi are you an
English language only rabbi and the
sister decades decades of preaching a
religion you're not an expert in or you
don't
you've never never encountered the
primary source texts or any of the
problems in the history of the religion
I've complete content for this coming
life and he is a self-made religious
authority on exactly this pattern he
went to Thailand he started meditating
at some point he declared himself a
teacher at some point he opened his own
meditation studio who knows where the
money for that came from it's not like
there are too many cooks in the kitchen
when you're the boss of that meditation
studio nobody else is in charge of you
nobody else was scrutinizing you not
morally not ethically not in terms of
textual authenticity not in terms of
outcomes there's no scientific team
measuring whether or not you're pseudo
medical claims oh the psychological and
health benefits of meditation actually
get results and good look if you if you
want to look up the peer-reviewed
research on that stuff it's really
depressing it's all a game of using the
most vaguely you know vaguely defined
terms possible
I had a friend someone I met online here
hi Rama and she was briefly convinced by
some of these articles if not connected
to jack Kornfield I don't think he wrote
them but I think she found out about
them through his his circle you know
they were making the same claims that
Christians make about the efficacy of
prayer you know like prayer and singing
can reduce your subjectively perceived
stress levels of course they can of
course they can the social experience of
going to a church and praying and
singing gee it reduces stress it makes
people feel better it makes cancer
patients feel better about the fact that
they're dying of cancer or that they're
suffering through cancer therapy so what
did absolutely nothing supernatural
within these same claims are made for
Buddhist meditation and they you know
they try to define you know subjective
stress levels as as vaguely and in as
confusing way as possible so you think
this is telling you there's a real
measurable medical benefit but guess
what these claims made of a prayer and
meditation it's not just the placebo
effect but if you compare them to the
same effects of going to the gym of
physical exercise because we do the same
types of research how does going to the
gym help cancer patients how does going
to the gym help elderly retired people
who are suffering social isolation guess
what
physical exercise is more effective than
meditation and so there's a whole pseudo
science pseudo medical literature
backing up the type of [ __ ] claims
that guys like Jace of Kotori Joseph
Goldstein and the bar Center trying to
make money from okay you can investigate
it for yourself I'm not getting any
deeper into it here but I'm starting off
by asking the question of anyone in the
world about tera vaada Buddhism
why would this be the guy sam harris
interviews and the answer is that sam
harris himself is not objective he has a
subjective personal connection
- this Meditation Center the bar
meditations that are and - Joseph
Goldstein he's known Joseph Goldstein
for 20 years or so etc okay Sam Harris
would never report on the philosophy of
ancient Greek in as biased and unfair
away as he's here reporting on Buddhism
he would never report on critique or
discuss Islam in the sloppy subjective
non rigorous way that he's here reported
on Buddhism and he would never talk
about the health benefits or the
psychological benefits of prayer in the
sloppy self-indulgent way that he's here
talking about meditation okay now if
you're watching this video and you are a
Buddhist or you are Pro Buddhists you
should care about this stuff even more
than I do
I'm a former poly scholar I'm a former
scholar of Buddhism but I'm not a member
of the Buddhist religion today I'm I'm
detached to a fault about this issue but
still if this is your religion if this
is the future of your religion you got
to hear about it
joke Joseph Goldstein even worse Joseph
Goldstein is someone who has an active
interest in bamboozling you although you
do not have the expertise to laugh out
loud and how Aegis Lee he's
misrepresenting his sources etc rather
than someone who was interested in
informing you or debunking
misconceptions about the religion the
ancient or the modern religion look man
my heart's not in it to read this I'll
try to keep going for one more second so
this is me addressing sam harris
directly please pause to reflect on how
absurdly uncritical your response is to
his discussing mara in contrast to the
way you'd respond to a christian
discussing satan or perhaps some other
religion describing a trickster demon
etcetera this came up in sam Harris's
debate with well not even debate his
interview with his uncritical promotion
of this guy goldstein you're talking
about having visions of Marah how would
you react if you were talking to someone
who was a Muslim talking about having
visions of Satan how would you react if
you were talking to someone who was
supposed to be a professor of ancient
Greek philosophy talking about having
visions of Plato or Socrates let alone
Zeus and Athena
I think you'd respond in a more
intellectually rigorous way especially
if you were sam harris professional
atheist professional self defined
skeptic but instead he acts like any
soft-hearted
[ __ ] flower child in broadcasting this
[ __ ] from the most corrupt the most
self-indulgent the most self-centered
the the most despicable form of Buddhism
that has ever existed anywhere in the
world and why do I say that about the
seemingly antiseptic white western
version of Buddhism that exists at the
bar centre and at other similar centers
that accept money
in exchange for
meditation to white people doesn't that
seem very hygienic and clean it's more
despicable precisely because they're not
getting out and dealing with the social
and political reality that real Buddhism
plunges you into gee you know this guy
Goldstein I forget how my decades and
decades ago I think in the 1960s he did
he worked in Thailand with the Peace
Corps she was he interested in the fact
that the United States at that time was
dropping more bombs on the tiny country
of Laos right next to Thailand they're
dropping more bombs on Laos than they
ever dropped on Germany in World War two
you know that that Indochina theater
Laos Cambodia Vietnam at just that time
they're dropping more bombs they did on
all of Germany and Japan combined during
World War two
you know if instead of taking the path
he had taken of opening his own
meditation studio and teaching Westview
if he had just stayed there and trained
to perform funeral rituals for local
peasants in that area and he had learned
he'd had the humility to learn the local
language Goldstein I just heard his
voice he can't pronounce the word Buddha
correctly he can't pronounce Buddhism
correctly the U vowel in that word in
both Pali and Sanskrit difference
between uh and ooh is that there are two
different spellings there are two
different words okay like you've gotten
this level you're supposedly a great
expert a great Swami a great guru and
you can't pronounce Buddha is very
common for me to hear the voice of these
people they're supposedly tera vaada
Buddhist leaders and they can't
pronounce tera bada they'd say there've
a de I've faced a face I've had
encounters people with that whether
they're people with PhDs or not whether
they're self-made gurus or not yeah it's
bad I was saying a minute ago that I'm
completely detached with this stuff the
sense in which I'm not detached is
exactly that I care about the suffering
of these people I care about this
history I care about political reality I
mean the meditation doesn't work the in
that sense I don't have to care about it
because it disproves itself
it's like phony cures for cancer it's
like praying to get rich
it doesn't work so I don't have to
debunk it it debunks itself you can kid
yourself for a while if you're watching
this video go ahead you could listen to
the same interview between sam harris
professional skeptic and an goldstein
professional steak whole new l salesman
you can sit there nodding your head in
agreement when he's talking about having
visions of maura his MA ARA the long a
mara okay mmm yeah this is completely
respectable intellectual discourse I see
no reason to be critical or scheduling
oh yeah oh gee mindfulness meditation
ology mmm the passing and meditation
that all sounds perfectly scientific I
don't have to either question um you
know measurable outcomes nor do I have
to question how this connects to the the
ancient textual sources written in Pali
there's language that almost nobody home
yeah sure hmm yeah I can totally you
know accept that some guy who just moved
to California and rented a room and
called himself a meditation instructor I
can totally accept how that guy would
know what he's talking about man village
blood ism gets a bad reputation and it
gets a bad reputation for good reasons
okay
lived in Cambodia Thailand Laos I spent
a little bit of time in Sri Lanka but it
was very memorable I lived in the same
Buddhist monastery that bhikkhu bodhi
used to live in and I had the same
bookshelf I was reading books that he
had signed that he had owned that he had
written I've had a lot of real
interesting experiences in Buddhist Asia
but yeah guess what if he had stayed in
Asia for any length of time at that
level I think he would come back with a
very different set of anti sights a very
different set of insights into human
condition because you go through that
suffering learning a foreign language a
horror foreign language like Cambodia is
suffering you suffer doing it it
requires humility to struggle to really
communicate with people in Cambodia
especially when you're not the one
paying the bills if you're not the boss
if you're not the one in charge
Cambodians will really sneer at you and
really be short-tempered with you and
really will not like the fact that
you're mispronouncing words
if you're wealthy or if you're in a
position of authority that's different
then Cambodians don't treat you that way
this is a generalisation beast
experience Thailand and Laos different
stories feel like you different story
but I mean we're not talking about
learning French or Spanish or German
many people say that learning Italian is
quite relaxing and enjoyable I'm willing
to believe that if your first language
is English learning Italian maybe a
vacation no learning these languages is
a ton of hard work and sorrow learning a
language like Pali incredibly difficult
much more difficult than learning
ancient Greek because the books and
other resources are garbage you have to
do so much to work yourself these people
go through none of that and they become
self-appointed Dharma masters and if
anyone on earth should be skeptical in
receiving those claims to Authority both
there were claims to authenticity
religious authority and their claims to
having real-world outcomes and semi
scientific benefits the meditation to G
if anyone should be critical of that it
should be Sam Harris
he should be the most critical person in
the world and he's not he's the least
continue with my met letter here I would
go further to say that you ie not an
abstract you but Sam Harris specifically
would never give this type of uncritical
reception to a scholar of ancient Greek
nor even to a scholar of Shakespeare you
would demand much more critically that
even a professed expert in these
non-religious fields much more carefully
demonstrate the validity of his or her
opinions yet here you are as uncritical
as any cult flunky in broadcasting a
bunch of baffle gab but a religion that
you know almost nothing about as a
concession I must add in the context of
discussing Islam etc it is genuinely
true that Buddhism presents an appealing
alternative even if it is just the
lesser of two evils and so you may be
inclined to turn off the skeptical side
of your brain in receiving such as snake
oil salesman as goldstein as a further
concession I would also say that tera
vaada Buddhism is the lesser of two
evils compared to many other forms of
Buddhism devoured by contrast some
horrendous varieties of Buddhism in both
Tibet and Japan can applause here it's
also very good sincere I understand I
sympathize the sam harris is accustomed
to the critique of islam
to some extent the critique of
Christianity and the critique of extreme
cold groups cult groups that kill people
I understand that Buddhism is not
menacing in the same way it's not scary
it's not threatening but that is not a
valid excuse to have this uncritical
idiotic attitude towards religion it's
not and it wouldn't be an excuse for
ancient Greek philosophy either even
though ancient Greek philosophy isn't
killing anybody it's not a threat and
you know look let's put pause for one
second think about what the word respect
means in this concept let's say to you
that I have tremendous respect for the
Department of ancient Greek at my own
University here in Canada hypothetical
there is a department of ancient Greek
here let's suppose I say to you we have
a great team of professors here I have
so much respect for this department of
ancient Greek I have faith in them I
believe in them this is a great
university department these are great
scholars still every single thing they
say I'm gonna scrutinize for myself and
on myriad issues I may disagree with the
professors and I may disagree with the
department as an authority and people
have conversation of this oh you know
professor so-and-so oh yeah he's a great
professor I have a lot of respect for
him he's a real authority's a real Ange
he's a real expert on ancient Greek he's
a real authority oh yeah yeah but you
know did you hear this stuff he said
about Aristotle and slavery it's it's
nuts it's completely crazy oh yeah boy
he's out to lunch on that you know Wow
you know I mean he's he's so
enthusiastic about trying to glorify the
status of slaves in ancient Athens that
you know I mean he just departs from the
texts and he really misrepresents
whatever stall is said was Limerick
this doesn't mean I don't respect his
authority it doesn't mean he's a fraud
it doesn't mean he's not a real scholar
of ancient Greek it doesn't mean he
can't read ancient Greek it just means I
disagree with him in a sense it means I
respect him enough to bother to disagree
with him I'm still reading his work or
I'm still listening to his lectures I
may
still be paying thousands of dollars in
tuition but yeah my critical faculties
are turned on even though there is no
threat of violence there's no threat of
world war 3 etc that's spurious again if
you are a Buddhist if you are Pro
Buddhist you should be demanding that
Buddhist philosophy be taken as
seriously as ancient Greek philosophy
and you should be demanding that the
religion be scrutinized in all of these
ways I don't know how much more this
letter I'm gonna read look the lesser of
two evils is still evil okay the fact
that some terabyte of Buddhism may be
much less threatening than Islam doesn't
mean it's good the fact that Christian
claims about prayer having medical
benefits are ridiculous doesn't mean
that Buddhist claims about meditation
having medical benefits and
psychological benefit doesn't mean
they're any less ridiculous i say to sam
harris however in your interview with
goldstein you have conducted yourself as
shamefully as any flower child ignoramus
who signs up for a 10-day vie pass in
the course you of all people should know
how to question someone in a rigorous
way about the extraordinary claims
they're making both in the realm of
pseudo medical claims of meditation and
also in the claims to canonical
authority / authenticity made by someone
like goldstein who never even became an
expert in modern tile ism via that
modern tile language much less in the
ancient Pali Canon or an understanding
the differences between the two
skipping to the end here thank you for
your time
I understand that you are trying to
engage with these issues sincerely but
you were engaging with Buddhism
guilelessly and from a position of
ignorance and gullibility that is
painful to behold really please ask
yourself how you would receive a scholar
of ancient Greek philosophy who made any
of the same claims you would I think be
much more shrewd both in questioning the
connection of the ancient sources and
also you'd be very rigorous in
questioning any claim to pseudo medical
benefits being provable in the modern
world today on the basis of the advice
of an ancient Greek source no matter how
nebulous were psychologically suggestive
the translation into modern English may
be sam harris is famous for a good
reason i just i started this video an
hour ago reflecting on a professor i had
back in the year 2001 and he became
famous because what he was talking about
became more important to the world
became more important politically after
2001 ok sam harris chose to discuss a
bunch of issues he really chose to base
his career around a bunch of issues that
became more and more important over time
within his life if he had chosen 20
years ago back when he apparently
converted to a form of [ __ ]
self-indulgent pay-to-play meditation
based buddhism if he had chosen back
then to base his academic career on
buddhist philosophy he would not be
famous he could have become an expert in
buddhism he had every opportunity and he
says what over 20 years ago he first
started meditating he first signed up
for these incredibly depraved and
corrupt from my perspective depraved and
corrupt forms of westernized Buddhism
and he's still a fan of them he still
supports them why why did he become an
expert in Islam and this critique of
Islam he's devoted someone why did he do
that instead of becoming a an expert in
Buddhism and a critic of Buddhism well
I'll tell you Sam Harris is famous for a
reason
he talks about issues that millions of
people really care about and that are
really politically loaded today Islam
gun control war violence if he had spent
his time talking about the Cambodian
Civil War the Cambodian border conflicts
this is stuff I have written articles
about if he had spent his time writing
about the Sri Lankan Civil War if he'd
gotten passionate about Buddhism in Sri
Lanka and this conflict between Buddhism
and Hinduism in Sri Lanka if you had
gotten passionate about the new Buddhist
movement in India the caste system
Hinduism Jainism Buddhism and what's
going on in India today he would not be
famous but his opinions about Buddhism
would have the respect of a small number
of people like me and instead while he's
legitimately his expertise on Islam
Christianity and a number of issues that
he's spent decades talking about written
books about cetera he does not have my
respect when he's talking about Buddhism
he has my complete contempt and whether
you are Buddhist atheist anti Buddhist
whatever your position is on this issue
even view the biggest fan of Sam Harris
in the world Sam Harris should have your
contempt to